---
layout: post
title: Avoid the Uncanny Valley of Interfaces
compressor: 2
---

"Let's just make this simple." A phrase muttered by Managers, Designers, and Developers everyday. Looking at a complex problem and attempting to simplify it in the form of an interface is an enticing proposition. There's a huge range of complexity in the tasks we can perform with software, from writing and email to cross-referencing different data sources in an analytics platform. For designers, the desire to simplify complex problems is in our DNA, but sometimes that effort ends up making things worse. There is a point that can be reached, where an interface has been simplified too much to be useful to an expert, yet remains too complicated for a beginner. Welcome to the uncanny interface valley.

## Creepy robots.
In robotics, there is a well known theory about making robots look like humans called the Uncanny Valley.

> The uncanny valley is a hypothesis in the field of robotics and 3D computer animation, which holds that when human replicas look and act almost, but not perfectly, like actual human beings, it causes a response of revulsion among human observers. The "valley" refers to the dip in a graph of the comfort level of humans as a function of a robot's human likeness.
> *- [Wikipedia][1]*

At first we get WALL-E, but as we add more and more human characteristics, we get something downright terrifying. Only once we have added enough human touches to get past the creepiness, does our horror subside. The same applies to interfaces. Try to simplify a complex process and you may be left with something that doesn't provide enough punch for experts but is still alienating to a beginner.

## Know your audience.
So how do you avoid the uncanny interface valley? The key is knowing your audience. In order to optimize your product, you need to know who you're building it for and what they're trying to accomplish. Does it take 4 extra clicks to do an advanced maneuver only 5% of your users will attempt? That's probably ok. You need to accept the fact that your product can't be perfect for everyone and embrace it.

[1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncanny_valley "Uncanny Valley - Wikipedia"